# "Will we continue scientific research?" -- Alexander Grothendieck

> Talk given at the CERN on January 27, 1972.  
> Original transcription by Jacqueline Picard from the magnetic recording.  
> Translated from French by Peio Borthelle from web sources [^3] [^4] [^5] [^6].

I've always been bothered by the fact that during my research activities this
influential name -- Alexander Grothendieck -- started becoming a common noun
(as in "the grothendieck construction" or "grothendieck fibrations", two very
common objects in categorical logic among other fields). As a matter of fact my
first encounter with his name was not in the context of mathematics but
listening to the speech transcribed below. A friend of mine -- fellow student
with whom I regularly talked about the social impact of the academic science --
stumbled upon it shortly after Grothendieck's death in 2014 which generated a
short burst of media interest and shared it with me.

Talking with French and international colleagues I realized that in general,
little was known about the interesting end of Grothendieck's career as a
mathematician. Most commonly one would hear that "he left academia abruptly",
that "he went to live alone secluded from society" or with uncomfortable
amusement that "he refused any form of publication of his later works" (how
childish can this be?). This depoliticization and "mad mathematician" trope is
quite notable as his turnaround was very much in phase with the ecological and
societal critics at the time (onward 1968 mobilizations). These ideas are still
very relevant and active today, perhaps tagged as radical ecology.

Recently I had these discussions again and realized that an English translation
of this talk was nowhere to be found online. The following aims to correct this
fact. Please send me any mistake you can find and feel free to reproduce the
translation with or without attribution to me. Copyright of the original audio
files appears to be held by CERN [^6].

Peio Borthelle

## Transcription

**Introduction by Daniel Dekkers:**

Good evening, ladies and gentlemen.

In the ten years we've been organizing our lecture series, we've periodically
asked scientists to come and give us their thoughts on science -- on the
responsibility of the scientist -- and I think it's particularly necessary to do
so because we have a tendency at CERN to think of ourselves as extraordinary
people doing theoretical things that aren't dangerous at all within an
exceptional European collaboration. So always caught up in these fine ideas
we tend -- perhaps a little too much -- to be satisfied with them and not to
ask ourselves deeper questions. It's precisely in order to go a little deeper
that it's useful to have speakers like Mr. Grothendieck, whom we have with us
this evening, and to whom I'd like to hand over the floor immediately.

**Alexander Grothendieck:**

I'm very pleased to have the opportunity to speak at CERN. For many people,
including myself, CERN is one of the few citadels, so to speak, of a certain
science, in fact a cutting-edge science: nuclear research. I've been proven
wrong. It seems that at CERN -- the European Organization for Nuclear Research
-- one doesn't do nuclear research. Be that as it may I think that in many
people's minds CERN does.

Nuclear research is indissolubly associated, for many people too, with military
research, with A and H bombs, and also with something whose drawbacks are only
just beginning to emerge: the proliferation of nuclear power plants. In fact,
the concern that nuclear research has provoked since the end of the last world
war has faded somewhat as the A-bomb explosion on Hiroshima and Nagasaki has
receded into the past. Of course, the accumulation of destructive A- and H-type
weapons kept a lot of people worried. A more recent phenomenon has been the
proliferation of nuclear power plants to meet the growing energy needs of
industrial society. However, it has become clear that this proliferation has a
number of -- to put it euphemistically -- "extremely serious" drawbacks, and
that it poses some very serious problems. The fact that cutting-edge research
is associated with a real threat to the survival of mankind, a threat even to
life itself on the planet, is not an exceptional situation, it's the rule. In
the one or two years I've been wondering about this, I've come to realize that
ultimately, in each of the major issues that currently threaten the survival of
the human species, these issues would not arise in their current form -- the
threat to survival would not arise -- if the state of our science were that of
the year 1900, for example. I don't mean to imply that science is the sole
cause of all these ills and dangers. There is of course a combination of
several things, but science, the current state of scientific research,
certainly plays an important role.

First of all, perhaps I could say a few personal words. I'm a mathematician.
I've devoted most of my life to mathematical research. As far as mathematical
research is concerned, both the research I've done and that done by colleagues
with whom I've come into contact, it seemed to me to be far removed from any
kind of practical application. For this reason, for a long time I felt
particularly disinclined to ask myself questions about the ins and outs of this
scientific research, and in particular its social impact. It's only quite
recently, in the last two years, that I've gradually begun to ask myself
questions on this subject. In the future, I'll only do what's strictly
necessary to support myself, since until proven otherwise I have no other
profession than mathematician. I know I'm not the only one to have asked this
question. Over the last year or two, and even over the last few months, more
and more people have been asking key questions on this subject. I'm quite sure
that at CERN too, many scientists and technicians are starting to ask them. In
fact, I've met some of them. What's more, I and others know people at CERN, for
example, who have "extremely serious" ideas about the so-called peaceful
applications of nuclear energy; but who dare not express them publicly for fear
of losing their position. Of course, this atmosphere is not specific to CERN. I
believe it's an atmosphere that prevails in most academic or research
organizations, in France, in Europe, and even, to a certain extent, in the
United States, where people who take the risk of openly expressing their
reservations -- even on a strictly scientific level, about certain scientific
developments -- are still a tiny minority.

So, for the past year or two, I've been asking myself questions. And not just
to myself. I've also been asking them to colleagues and, particularly over the
last few months, six months perhaps, I've been taking every opportunity to meet
scientists, whether in public discussions like this one or in private, and
raise these questions. In particular: "Why do we do scientific research?". A
question that is virtually the same perhaps, in the long run at least, as the
question: "Are we going to continue scientific research?". The extraordinary
thing is to see how incapable my colleagues are of answering this question. In
fact, for most of them, the question is simply so strange, so extraordinary,
that they refuse even to contemplate it. In any case, they are extremely
reluctant to give any kind of answer. When we manage to elicit an answer in
public or private discussions, what we generally hear is, in order of frequency
of response: "Scientific research? I do it because it gives me pleasure,
because it gives me intellectual satisfaction". Sometimes people say, "I do
scientific research because I have to make a living, because I get paid for
it."

As far as the first motivation is concerned, I can say that it was my main
motivation during my life as a researcher. Indeed scientific research gave me
pleasure and I didn't ask myself many questions beyond that. In fact if it gave
me pleasure, it was largely because social consensus told me that it was a
noble, positive activity, one worth undertaking; by the way without any detail
on how it was positive, noble, etc. Obviously direct experience told me that
with my colleagues we were building something, a certain edifice. There was a
sense of progress that gave a certain feeling of achievement... of plenitude,
and at the same time a certain fascination with the problems at hand.

But all this, in the end doesn't answer the question: "What is the social
purpose of scientific research?". Because, if its sole purpose were to give
pleasure say to a handful of mathematicians or other scientists, society would
doubtless hesitate to invest considerable funds in it -- in mathematics they're
not very considerable but in the other sciences they can be. Society would also
be reluctant to pay tribute to this type of activity whereas it is rather
silent about activities that may require just as much effort, but of a
different type, such as playing marbles or similar. We can develop to the
extreme certain facilities, certain technical faculties, be they intellectual,
manual or other, but why is there this emphasis on scientific research? It's a
question worth asking.

Talking to many of my colleagues over the past year, I've come to realize that
in fact this satisfaction that scientists are supposed to derive from
exercising their cherished profession, is a pleasure... which is not a pleasure
for everyone! I was astonished to discover that for most scientists, scientific
research is felt to be a constraint, a servitude. Doing scientific research is
a matter of life and death for any considered member of the scientific
community. Scientific research is a prerequisite for getting a job, once you've
embarked on this path without really knowing what it's all about. Once you've got your
job, it's an imperative to move up the ladder. Once you've moved up the ladder,
even assuming you've made it to the top, it's an imperative to be considered in
the running. You're expected to produce. Scientific production -- like any
other kind of production in the ambient civilization -- is considered an
imperative in itself. The remarkable thing about all this is that in the end,
the content of research becomes a second thought. It's all about producing a
certain number of "papers". In extreme cases, a scientist's productivity is
measured by the number of pages they publish. Under these conditions, for a
large number of scientists -- certainly for the overwhelming majority, with the
real exception of a few who are fortunate enough to have an exceptional gift or
to be in a social position and disposition that enables them to free themselves
from these feelings of constraint -- for most, scientific research is a real
constraint that kills the pleasure one can have in carrying it out.

This is something I discovered with amazement, because we don't talk about it.
Between my students and myself, I thought there was a spontaneous and
egalitarian relationship. In fact, it was an illusion in which I was trapped.
Without even realizing it there was a real hierarchical relationship. The
mathematicians who were my students or who considered themselves less well
placed than me and who felt alienated in their work, would never have had the
idea of talking to me about it until of my own accord, I left the scientific
ghetto in which I was confined and tried to talk to people who weren't from my
milieu. That milieu of esoteric scientists who did high mathematics.

To illustrate this point I'd like to give a very concrete example. Two weeks
ago I went on a tour of Brittany. Among other things, I had the opportunity to
visit Nantes where I met friends and spoke at a Maison de Jeunes et de la
Culture \[TN: MJC, youth cultural center\] about the kind of issues we're
discussing today. I was there on Monday. As my colleagues from the University
of Nantes had been warned of my arrival, they had asked me in extremis to come
and give a talk on mathematical subjects with them the following afternoon. As
it happened, on the very day of my visit one of the Nantes mathematicians, M.
Molinaro, committed suicide. So because of this unfortunate incident the
mathematical talk that had been planned was cancelled. Instead I contacted a
number of colleagues to ask if we could get together to talk a little about
mathematical life within the mathematics department at the University and also
to talk a little about this suicide. There was an extremely revealing session
that afternoon in Nantes where everyone present -- with one exception I'd say
-- clearly felt that this suicide was very very closely linked to the kind of
things we'd been discussing the evening before at the MJC.

In fact, I'll perhaps give one or two details. It so happened that Molinaro had
two students working on post-graduate theses -- I don't think they were state
theses. These theses were not considered to be of sufficient scientific value.
They were judged very harshly by Dieudonné, who is a good colleague of mine and
with whom I wrote a major treatise on algebraic geometry. So I know him very
well, he's a man of very sound scientific judgment, who is very demanding when
it comes to the quality of scientific work. As a result, when these theses were
being discussed by the Commission for inclusion on the list of candidates for
higher education posts, he undermined them and their inclusion was refused.
This of course was felt as a kind of personal affront by Molinaro who had
already had difficulties before, and he committed suicide on these
circumstances. In fact I had a mathematician friend called Terenhöfel who also
committed suicide. I know a number of mathematicians -- I'm talking mainly
about mathematicians here, since that's the milieu I've known best -- who have
gone mad.

I don't think that's something peculiar to mathematics. I think that the kind
of atmosphere that prevails in the scientific world -- whether mathematical or
not -- a kind of atmosphere with extremely rarefied air, and the pressure that
is exerted on researchers have a lot to do with the evolution of these
unfortunate cases.

Concerning the pleasure we take in scientific research, I believe there can be
enjoyment. But I've come to the conclusion that the enjoyment of some -- the
enjoyment of those in high places, the enjoyment of the brilliant -- comes at
the expense of genuine repression of the average scientist.

Another aspect of this problem which goes beyond the limits of the scientific
community as a whole is the fact that these high flights of human thought take
place at the expense of the population as a whole which is dispossessed of all
knowledge. In the sense that in the dominant ideology of our society the only
true knowledge is scientific knowledge, which is the prerogative of a few
million people on the planet, perhaps one person in a thousand. All the others
are supposed to "not know" and in fact when you talk to them they have the
impression that they "don't know". Those who do know are the ones up there in
the high sciences: the mathematicians, the scientists, the very knowledgeable
and so on.

So I think there's quite a lot of critical comment to be made on the pleasure
we get from science and its side effects. This pleasure is a kind of
ideological justification for a certain course that human society is taking and
as such I think that even the most disinterested science that is being done in
the current context, and even the most remote from practical application, has
an extremely negative impact.

It's for this reason that personally I currently refrain as far as possible
from taking part in this kind of activity. I'd like to clarify why I initially
interrupted my research activity: it was because I realized that there were
such urgent problems to be solved concerning the survival crisis that it seemed
madness to waste forces on abstract scientific research. At the time I made
this decision I was thinking of spending several years doing research,
acquiring some basic knowledge of biology, with the idea of applying and
developing mathematical techniques, mathematical methods, to deal with
biological problems. It's an absolutely fascinating thing for me and from the
moment some friends and I started a group called "Survivre" \[TN: Surviving\] --
precisely to deal with questions of survival -- from that moment on, overnight,
the interest in disinterested scientific research completely vanished for me
and I've never had a minute's regret since.

Then there's the second motivation: science, scientific activity, allows us to
earn a living. This is actually the main motivation for most scientists,
according to the conversations I've had with many of them. There's a lot to be
said for that too. In particular for the young people who are currently
embarking on a career in science -- those who study science under the
assumption that they will find a ready-made job that will provide them with
security. I think it's generally well known that this is a great illusion. By
dint of producing highly qualified people we've really produced too many since
the great boom in the production of young scientists -- since Sputnik some
fifteen years ago -- and there's more and more unemployment in scientific
careers. The problem is becoming increasingly acute for a growing number of
young people, especially young scientists. In the USA we must produce something
like 1000 or 1500 theses a year in mathematics alone and the number of job
openings is about a third of that.

On the other hand the fact remains that when science enables us to earn a
salary and support ourselves, the links between our work and the satisfaction of
our needs are practically cut and dried. The link is practically formed by the
salary but our needs are not directly linked to the activity we perform. In
fact -- and this is the remarkable thing -- when the question is asked: "What
is the social purpose of science?", practically nobody is able to answer. The
scientific activities we engage in don't serve to directly fulfill any of our
needs, any of the needs of our loved ones, of people we may know. There's a
perfect alienation between ourselves and our work.

It's not a phenomenon peculiar to scientific activity; I think it's a situation
concerning almost all professional activities within industrial civilization.
It's one of the great failings of industrial civilization.

As far as mathematics in particular is concerned, for the last few months I've
been really trying to discover a way in which mathematical research -- that which
has been carried out over the last few centuries, I'm not necessarily talking
about the most recent mathematical research, in which I was still
involved at a fairly recent date -- could be of use from the point of view of
satisfying our needs. I've been talking to all kinds of mathematicians about
this for the last three months. No one has been able to give me an answer. In
audiences like this or smaller groups of colleagues nobody knows. I wouldn't
say that any of this knowledge isn't somehow capable of being applied to make
us happy, to allow us greater fulfillment, to satisfy certain genuine desires,
but so far I haven't found it. Had I found it I would have been much happier,
much more content in some respects, at least until recently. After all I'm a
mathematician myself and it would have pleased me to know that my mathematical
knowledge could be used for something socially positive. However in the two
years I've been trying to understand a little bit about the course society is
taking, the possibilities we have to act favorably on this course -- in
particular the possibilities we have to enable the survival of the human
species and to enable life to evolve in a way that's worth living, that's worth
surviving -- my knowledge as a scientist hasn't served me once.

The only point on which my training as a mathematician served me was not so
much my training as a mathematician as such, nor my name as a mathematician, it
was that since I was a well-known mathematician I had the opportunity to be
invited by quite a few universities all over the world. This gave me the
opportunity to speak with many colleagues, students and people from all over
the world. This happened for the first time last spring when I toured Canada
and the United States. In the space of three weeks I visited around twenty
campuses. I benefited enormously from these contacts; my ideas and my vision of
things have evolved enormously since then. But it's only incidentally that my
mathematical background came in handy. In any case my mathematical knowledge
really didn't help.

I might add that since last spring, when I receive an invitation to give a
mathematical talk somewhere and when I accept it, I make it clear that I'm only
interested in it insofar as it gives me the opportunity to discuss more
important problems such as the one we're talking about here. In general it also
gives me the opportunity to talk with non-mathematicians, with scientists from
other disciplines, and also with non-scientists. That's why I ask my fellow
mathematicians to have at least one person from the department take charge of
organizing such debates. This has been the case for example for all the
conferences I've given in Canada and the USA. To date no one has ever once
refused this proposal to organize non-technical, non-purely mathematical
debates on the bangs of the mathematical invitation in the traditional sense.
In fact since then I've also modified my practice a little by introducing,
shall we say, preliminary comments into the mathematical presentations
themselves so that there isn't too sharp a cut-off between the mathematical
part of my stay and the other.

So not only am I announcing the more general public debate that takes place
afterwards but I'm also distancing myself from the very practice of inviting
foreign speakers to perform a certain ritual -- namely to give a high-profile
lecture on a great esoteric subject in front of an audience of fifty or a
hundred people, perhaps two or three of whom can painfully make some sense of
it while the others feel genuinely humiliated because, effectively, they feel a
social constraint placed on them to go. The first time I asked the question
clearly was in Toulouse a few months ago, and I actually felt a kind of relief
that these things were being said. For the first time since I've been doing
this kind of lecture, spontaneously, without anything having been agreed in
advance, after the mathematical lecture which was indeed very esoteric and
which in itself was very tedious and burdensome -- I had to apologize several
times during the lecture because really it was quite intolerable -- well
immediately afterwards an extremely interesting discussion took place precisely
on the theme: "What's the point of this kind of mathematics?" and "What's the
point of this kind of ritual of giving lectures to people who have absolutely
no interest in it?".

My intention was not to create some kind of anti-science theory. I can see that
I've barely scratched the surface of some of the problems associated with the
question "Are we going to continue with scientific research?", even among those
indicated on this flyer, a copy of which I've seen. For example about the
possibilities of developing a scientific practice entirely different from
current scientific practice and about a more detailed critique of that
practice.

Instead I spoke in fairly concrete terms about my personal experience -- about
what was passed on to me directly by others -- for half an hour. That's
probably enough; perhaps it would be preferable for other points to be dealt
with in a little more depth during a general discussion.

Before I finish my introductory speech I'd just like to say that I've brought
back a few copies of a magazine we publish called "Survivre et Vivre" \[TN:
Surviving and Living\]. This is the group I mentioned at the beginning, which
changed its name a few months ago. Instead of "Survivre", after a rather
significant and characteristic change of perspective it has become "Survivre et
Vivre". In the beginning we started out with the fear of a possible end of the
world where the essential imperative for us was the imperative of survival.
Since then, through a parallel process for many of us and others outside the
group we've come to a different conclusion. At first we were overwhelmed by the
multiplicity of extremely tangled problems in such a way that it seemed
impossible to touch any one of them without at the same time bringing on all
the others. In the end we would have given in to a kind of despair, a black
pessimism, had we not made the following change of perspective: within the
usual system of reference in which we live -- within the given type of
civilization, let's call it western civilization or industrial civilization --
there is no possible solution; the interweaving of economic, political,
ideological and scientific problems is such that there are no possible
outcomes.

At the beginning we thought that with scientific knowledge -- by making it
available to enough people -- we'd be able to better grasp a solution to the
problems at hand. We've come back from that illusion. We now believe that the
solution will not come from more scientific knowledge or more techniques but
from a change in civilization. That's where the extremely important change of
perspective comes in. For us the dominant civilization -- industrial
civilization -- is doomed to disappear in a relatively short time, in perhaps
ten, twenty or thirty years... one or two generations, in that order of
magnitude; because the problems currently posed by this civilization are
effectively insoluble problems.

We now see our role in the following direction: to be ourselves an integral
part of a process of transformations -- of ferments of transformations from one
type of civilization to another -- which we can begin to develop right now. In
this sense the problem of survival for us has been superseded, it has become
the problem of life, of the transformation of our lives in the immediate
future; in such a way that on the one hand we are talking about ways of living
and human relations that are worthy of being lived and, on the other hand are
viable in the long term and can serve as a starting point for the establishment
of post-industrial civilizations, of new cultures.

For subscriptions, please write to my address: 21, avenue Kennedy, 91 Massy;
conditions are indicated in the journal.

[^1]: The New Alchemy Institute is a group of agrobiology researchers founded
  by Dr. John Todd and Dr. William McLarney in Woods Hole, Massachusetts, USA
  (Nancy Todd, The Book of the new alchemists, Dutton, New York 1977).
[^2]: Alas! No other than Nobel Prize winner E. Rutherford, who in
  1932 saw "no practical application for research on the atom". \[TN: footnote
  without indication of origin\].
[^3]: <https://sciences-critiques.fr/allons-nous-continuer-la-recherche-scientifique/>
[^4]: <https://sniadecki.wordpress.com/2012/05/20/grothendieck-recherche>
[^5]: <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZW9JpZXwGXc>
[^6]: <https://cds.cern.ch/record/912518/>
